

1.1 Introduction



The central theme of this book is to learn how to solve problems by writing a program.

what is programming?
programming
program
This book is about programming. So, what is programming? The term programming means to create (or develop) software, which is also called a program. In basic terms, software contains instructions that tell a computer—or a computerized device—what to do.
Software is all around you, even in devices you might not think would need it. Of course, you expect to find and use software on a personal computer, but software also plays a role in running airplanes, cars, cell phones, and even toasters. On a personal computer, you use word processors to write documents, web browsers to explore the Internet, and e-mail programs to send and receive messages. These programs are all examples of software. Software developers create software with the help of powerful tools called programming languages.
This book teaches you how to create programs by using the Java programming language. There are many programming languages, some of which are decades old. Each language was invented for a specific purpose—to build on the strengths of a previous language, for example, or to give the programmer a new and unique set of tools. Knowing there are so many programming languages available, it would be natural for you to wonder which one is best. However, in truth, there is no “best” language. Each one has its own strengths and weaknesses. Experienced programmers know one language might work well in some situations, whereas a different language may be more appropriate in other situations. For this reason, seasoned programmers try to master as many different programming languages as they can, giving them access to a vast arsenal of software-development tools.
If you learn to program using one language, you should find it easy to pick up other languages. The key is to learn how to solve problems using a programming approach. That is the main theme of this book.
You are about to begin an exciting journey: learning how to program. At the outset, it is helpful to review computer basics, programs, and operating systems (OSs). If you are already familiar with such terms as central processing unit (CPU), memory, disks, operating systems, and programming languages, you may skip Sections 1.2–1.4.


(Liang 2)
Liang, Y. D. Introduction to Java Programming and Data Structures, Comprehensive Version, 11th Edition. Pearson, 20170612. VitalBook file.
The citation provided is a guideline. Please check each citation for accuracy before use.